Curriculum Vitae

Dr. V. G. Balaji
Full name: Balaji Gowrivel Vijayakumar
Date of Birth: 24/08/1991
Email: vgbalaji91@gmail.com

Address: Plot 209, 4th cross street, Vaithyalingam Salai, Neelankarai, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India- 600115
Phone: (+91) 9963016663 or (+91) 9487207137
OrCID
SCOPUS
Google Scholar
LinkedIn
SUMMARY

Researcher with a strong experience in organic synthesis of small drug-like molecules, antimicrobial biopolymer (polysaccharide) films, polymer characterizations, data analysis, and computational studies. Enjoys learning new skills, techniques and problem-solving. Highly motivated, creative, result-oriented team player with exceptional communication skills. Diligent, capable of meeting deadlines for multiple tasks, ensuring successful completion of project goals.
EDUCATION

    Ph.D. Chemistry from Pondicherry University, India (September 2016 – May 2023)
    MSc Chemistry (5-year integrated course) from the University of Hyderabad, India (2009-2014)

RESEARCH EXPERIENCE / WORK EXPERIENCE

    Doctoral research (September 2016 to May 2023, Dept. of Chemistry, Pondicherry University, India)
        Developed chitosan-based antimicrobial polymer films using small molecules with potential for industrial or medical applications.
        Assisted colleagues in in silico evaluation in drug-discovery against disease proteins.
        Mentored 7 graduate students in lab practices and oversaw their capstone projects.
    Master of Science in Chemistry dissertation (2014): University of Hyderabad, India.
        Developed emulsions of polyurethane-clay composites with improved physical properties.

SKILLS AND AREAS OF EXPOSURE

    Polymer synthesis, chemistry, and analysis
        Preparation of thin film membranes, chemical and physical characterization. Carbohydrate polymers / Biopolymers.
    Synthetic organic chemistry
        Small-molecule inhibitor design and synthesis.
        Reaction optimization via simple, cost-effective reagents.
    Instruments/techniques: Hands-on with Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), Fourier transform-infrared (FTIR), Ultraviolet-Vis (UV-Vis) spectroscopy, Gel permeation chromatography (GPC), Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), Tensile strength analysis. Limited experience with High Resolution-Transmission Electron Microscope (HR-TEM), High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (powder and single crystal XRD), and Electrospinning. Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)
    Computational skills
        Molecular docking and analysis using Autodock Vina and Autodock 4, Pymol, Ligplot+, Biovia Discovery studio, and PyRX. Use of BLAST studies, RAST annotation pipeline, WGCNA clustering, and Geochip analysis. Basic Linux, Python programming, and scriptwriting using Chemdraw, SciFinder, PubChem, Chemspider, Scifinder, Chemsketch, and MarvinSketch.
    Data analysis and interpretation
        GraphPad Prism, Origin, Microsoft Excel, and ImageJ software for data analysis and interpretation.

PUBLICATIONS


CONFERENCES AND WORKSHOPS

    Attended the International Conference on Chemical Sciences (ICCS 2022) in Chennai, India.
    Presented poster on "Chitosan-based antimicrobial films" at the National Seminar on Polymers and Materials (NSPM 2021) in Pondicherry, India.

REFERENCES

Available upon request.
